---
layout: post
title: "Dune"
date: 2021-12-30
tags: [Quotes, Sci-Fi]
cover_image: /assets/images/dune/hulud.jpg
---

Selected passages from *Dune* by Frank Herbert. Great movie, even greater book.

---

> "One does not obtain food-safety-freedom by instinct alone"

> "I must not fear. Fear is the mind-killer. Fear is the little-death that brings total obliteration. I will face my fear. I will permit it to pass over me and through me. And when it has gone past I will turn the inner eye to see its path. Where the fear has gone there will be nothing. Only I will remain."

> "The willow submits itself to the wind and prospers until one day it is many willows --- a wall against the wind. This is the willow's purpose."

> "Muad'Dib learned rapidly because his first training was in how to learn. And the first lesson of all was the basic trust that he could learn . . . Muad'Dib knew that every experience carries its lesson."

> "Command must always look confident, he thought. All that faith riding on your shoulders while you sit in the critical seat and never show it"

> "There is probably no more terrible instant of enlightenment than the one in which you discover your father is a man --- with human flesh."

> "Mood's a thing for cattle or for making love. You fight when the necessity arises, no matter your mood"

> "He tells us 'The vision of time is broad, but when you pass through it, time becomes a narrow door.' And always, he fought the temptation to choose a clear, safe course, warning 'That path leads ever down into stagnation.'"

> "What do you despise? By this you are truly known"

> "The mind can go either direction under stress --- towards positive or towards negative: on or off. Think of it as a spectrum whose extremes are unconsciousness at the negative end and hyperconsciousness at the positive end. The way the mind will lean under stress is strongly influenced by training."

> "How often it is that the angry man rages denial of what his inner self is telling him."

> "The power to destroy a thing is the absolute control over it."

> "Knowing where the trap is . . . that's the first step in evading it"
> --- Duke Leto Atreides
